
=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
i
REAL-TIME CYBER-AGGRESSION DETECTION AND
MITIGATION USING NAIVE BAYES AND VADER IN A
CHROMIUM-BASED BROWSER EXTENSION
A Thesis Proposal
Submitted to the Faculty of
The College of Computing Studies
PAMANTASAN NG CABUYAO
City of Cabuyao, Laguna
In Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for the Degree:
BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN COMPUTER SCIENCE
By:
Damian, Ryzza Miel E.
Garcia, Angel Mae P.
Palisoc, Cyryl P.
Regidor, Yasmien Aira V.
2026


=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
ii
RECOMMENDATION LETTER


=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
iii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Title
Page
i
Recommendation Letter
ii
Table of Contents
iii
List of Tables
iv
List of Figures
v
List of Appendices
vi
CHAPTER
I
THE PROBLEM AND ITS BACKGROUND
Page
Introduction
1
Statement of the Problem
3
Scope and Limitation
5
Significance of the Study
6
II
REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE AND STUDIES
Conceptual Literature
9
Research Literature
Review of Related Literature
11
11


=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
iv
Cyber-aggression Detection
Naive Bayes for Text Classification
VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntiment
Reasoner)
Browser Extension Systems for Real-Time Online Safety
Review of Related Studies
Limitations of Single-Algorithm Detection Models
Hybrid Approaches in Cyber-Aggression Detection
Real-Time Browser-Based Detection Systems
Challenges in Detecting Contextual and Evolving Online
Language
11
12
13
13
14
14
15
15
15
Theoretical Background
16
Conceptual Framework
18
Synthesis
20
Definition of Terms
21
III
METHODS AND PROCEDURES
Research Design
25
Research Locale
26
Respondents of the Study
27
Data Gathering Procedure
28
Discussion
on
Algorithms/Mathematical
Concepts
Used/Proposed Solution
31
System Development Methodology
47
Ethical Considerations
60
LITERATURE CITED
64


=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
v
APPENDICES
67
LIST OF TABLES
Table
Page
1
Respondents of the Study
28
2
3
Distribution of Respondents and Sampling Method
Four-Point Likert Scale Interpretation for User Feedback
58
60


=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
vi
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure
Page
1
Theoretical Framework of TPC and ACT
17
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Conceptual Framework of the Study
Algorithm Workflow for Cyber-Aggression Detection and
Mitigation
Scrum Methodology
Use Case Diagram of the Proposed System
Activity Diagram of the Text Extraction Module
Activity Diagram of the Classification Module
Activity Diagram of the Mitigation Module
18
35
48
50
52
53
54


=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
vii
LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX TITLE
Page
A
Confidentiality and Non-Disclosure Agreement
B
Validated Research Instrument/s
C
Informed Consent Form
D
Research Ethics Review Committee Evaluation
E
Short Report of Plagiarism Software
F
Report of Language Software
G
Bio-Note of Student Researchers


=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
viii


=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
1
adCHAPTER I
THE PROBLEM AND ITS SETTING
This chapter presents the research study on the development of a real-time
cyber-aggression detection system to be implemented as a Chromium-based browser
extension using Naive Bayes and VADER sentiment analysis. It defines the problem
statement, significance of the study, its scope, and limitations.
The research aims to improve online safety by automatically detecting and
mitigating harmful content through a hybrid machine learning approach.
Introduction
The rise of social media and user-based platforms have transformed the way how
people interact on the internet, allowing instant communication with anyone around the
world. At the same time, these platforms have also made it easier for cyber aggression,
harassment, and toxic behavior to spread with little consequence [1]. The anonymity and
lack of accountability online have led to more cases of cyberbullying, hate speech, and
other harmful behaviors, which can seriously affect user's mental health and well-being
[2]. As digital platforms continue to evolve, there is a growing need for real-time tools to
quickly detect and remove harmful content.
Recent trends in cyber-aggression detection focus on automated systems that
use machine learning and natural language processing. Studies show that supervised
learning models, Naive Bayes classifiers, are effective at telling apart aggressive and
non-aggressive content on social media. Naga and Lavilles [1] used machine learning to
find cyberbullying in Filipino tweets and found that models tailored to specific languages
work better. Kumari, Yadav, and Kargutkar [10] also found that combining machine
learning with careful feature selection helps identify cyberbullying across different
social media platforms. These findings highlight the value of a probabilistic classification
for automated content moderation.


=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
2
Sentiment analysis has emerged as a crucial method for comprehending
emotions in online communication, alongside machine learning classification. Research
on cyber-aggression now makes a significant use of the VADER algorithm, which was
created to assess sentiment in a short and informal social media posts. Ashari [3]
showed that the accuracy of media comment analysis is enhanced when VADER
sentiment ratings are combined with Naive Bayes categorization. Lidder [9] discovered
that supervised learning models perform better when sentiment-intensity characteristics
are added than when bag-of-words methods are used alone. These findings suggest that
detection
systems
can
be
strengthened
by
integrating
sentiment
analysis
with
probabilistic classification.
Browser-based safety tools are a new trend in real-time content moderation.
They minimize delays and safeguard privacy by processing data on the user's device.
The viability of browser-based safety measures was demonstrated by Zhang and Park
[24], who created an AI-powered Chromium-based plugin to identify cyberbullying.
Additionally, V. J., Jagadish, and George [5] created a browser extension that
demonstrates the effectiveness of client-side classification by using machine learning to
detect a phishing. Still, many current browser-based tools depend on servers or employ
computationally intensive algorithms, which can slow things down or compromise user
privacy.
Despite recent progress, there are still significant research gaps. First, while
several research have demonstrated the effectiveness of VADER sentiment analysis and
Naive Bayes classification separately, few have looked at integrating them into a
lightweight system that operates in real time on the user's device. Second, server-side
processing is still used by the majority of browser-based moderation tools, which can
negatively impact performance and privacy. Third, cyber-aggression is difficult for
keyword filters to detect because it frequently takes the form of oblique anger or sarcasm
[15]. Fourth, systems must be adaptable and simple to update due to the rapid changes
in online language [16].This study aims to address several kinds of issues. Most of
current cyber-aggression detection techniques only take action after damage has already
occurred. Many moderating solutions either utilize basic filters that overlook minor


=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
3
aggressiveness or rely on users to report problems. Server-based systems have the
potential to slow down operations and compromise privacy [13]. Also, relying on a single
detection method often fails to capture both the patterns and emotional cues present in
aggressive messages [17]. Users are still exposed to unsafe content as a result of these
problems.
Current
cyber-aggression
detection
systems
are
largely
server-dependent,
reactive, and limited to single-algorithm approaches, leaving users exposed to harmful
content in real time. There is a need for a lightweight, privacy-preserving, client-side
detection framework that integrates probabilistic classification and sentiment analysis
within a browser-based environment to proactively protect users before they encounter
aggressive content.
This study aims to address these gaps by developing a real-time Chromium-
based browser extension that detects cyber-aggression using both Naive Bayes
classification and VADER sentiment analysis. The goal is to build a lightweight tool that
runs entirely on the user's device, keeps data private, and responds quickly. The system
will use a hybrid approach that combines probabilistic classification with sentiment
analysis and will automatically hide aggressive content before users see it. Because
everything runs in the browser, sensitive data stays local, and users get instant
protection from cyber-aggression.
Statement of the Problem
The general problem of this study is that online users are increasingly exposed to
cyber-aggressive content across various websites and social media platforms. The
related literature and studies on cyber-aggression detection and mitigation systems lack
a comprehensive understanding and solutions regarding the development of an effective
real-time,
client-side
hybrid
detection
framework
that
combines
Naive
Bayes
classification and VADER sentiment analysis for accurately identifying and masking
cyber-aggressive content within a Chromium-based browser extension. The proposed


=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
4
hybrid framework aims to achieve automated, real-time detection and masking of cyber
aggression by processing on the client side, thereby preserving the framework's
efficiency, responsiveness, and reliability.
Specifically, the researchers aim to address the following questions:
1. How to develop a real-time cyber-aggression detection and mitigation system
using a hybrid approach of Naive Bayes and VADER?
2. How effectively can the proposed hybrid model detect cyber-aggressive content
compared to single-algorithm approaches in terms of:
2.1. precision;
2.2. recall; and
2.3. F1-score?
3. What are the assessments of the users regarding the proposed browser
extension in terms of:
3.1. functional suitability;
3.2. interaction capability;
3.3. performance efficiency; and
3.4. reliability?
4. What are the assessments of the IT experts regarding the proposed system in
terms of:
4.1. functional suitability;
4.2. interaction capability;
4.3. maintainability; and
4.4. reliability?


=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
5
Scope and Limitation
This study focuses on the development and evaluation of a real-time cyber-
aggression detection and mitigation system implemented as a Chromium-based browser
extension, conducted during the Academic Year 2025–2026. The primary beneficiaries
of this study are general online users in Laguna, Philippines who regularly engage with
text-based content on websites and social media platforms. The system will be designed
to
provide
real-time
protection
by
automatically
detecting
and
mitigating
cyber-
aggressive content encountered during everyday browsing sessions.
The proposed system will be developed and deployed as a Chromium-based
browser extension using the Manifest V3 framework, meaning it will be designed to work
on any Chromium-based browser such as Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Brave, and
Opera without requiring any code changes. Testing and evaluation will be conducted
across all supported Chromium-based browsers to verify consistent performance and
compatibility across platforms. Non-Chromium-based browsers such as Mozilla Firefox
and Apple Safari are not supported in the current version of this study and are
recommended for future development.
The system will be evaluated in controlled environments on selected text-heavy
websites containing user-generated text. End users will assess the system based on
functional suitability, interaction capability, performance efficiency, and reliability, while IT
professionals will evaluate it based on functional suitability, interaction capability,
maintainability, and reliability. The hybrid model's performance will be measured using
precision,
recall,
and
F1-score
and
will
be
compared
against
single-algorithm
approaches.
However, the study acknowledges several limitations that are beyond the
researchers' control. First, the system is restricted to analyzing text-based content only
and cannot process images, videos, emojis, audio, or memes that may also carry cyber-
aggressive intent. This is beyond the researchers' control as incorporating multimedia


=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
6
analysis would require additional models and computational resources that fall outside
the scope of a lightweight, client-side browser extension. Second, the system is limited to
English-language text. This is a constraint beyond the researchers' control because the
available labeled training datasets used to build the Naive Bayes classifier are composed
primarily of English samples, and developing a reliable multilingual model would require
significantly larger and more diverse datasets that are not feasible within the timeframe
of this study. Third, the Naive Bayes algorithm and VADER have inherent constraints in
detecting aggressiveness expressed through sarcasm, coded language, emergent slang,
or nuanced contextual implications. These limitations are beyond the researchers' control
as both methods rely on fixed training data and predefined lexicons that cannot
automatically adapt to the constantly evolving nature of online language. Fourth, the
system relies on whitespace-delimited tokenization, meaning it cannot detect cyber-
aggressive language written as intentionally joined or concatenated words designed to
bypass detection. This is a known architectural constraint of standard natural language
processing tokenizers and cannot be resolved without adopting more complex parsing
techniques outside the scope of this study. Fifth, performance may degrade on extremely
dynamic or content-heavy webpages that require frequent DOM updates. This is beyond
the researchers' control as browser memory and processing allocation are governed by
the operating system and browser engine, not the extension itself. Lastly, the study does
not employ deep learning or transformer-based models, as these require substantially
greater computational resources and would conflict with the study's core objective of
building a lightweight, privacy-preserving, client-side detection system.
The system will combine Naive Bayes classification and VADER sentiment
analysis to detect and reduce harmful text on web pages. The proposed system will have
several main components. The text extraction module will scan and pull user-
generated text from web pages. The classification module will examine the extracted
text using the Naive Bayes algorithm and VADER sentiment analysis to determine
whether it contains cyber-aggressive language. When aggressive content is found, the
mitigation module will automatically apply techniques such as hiding or blurring the text
to prevent users from being exposed to it.


=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
7
Additionally, the system includes a blocklist, which ensures that specified terms
are always treated as harmful and filtered regardless of the detection model's output, and
a whitelist, which prevents selected words from being flagged or hidden even if the
detection model identifies them as potentially aggressive, giving users greater control
over the filtering behavior. The system will operate by interacting with the Document
Object Model (DOM) of a webpage, continuously monitoring and scanning for new or
dynamic user-generated content as it loads. When harmful content is detected, the
system adjusts the visual properties of the relevant DOM elements to automatically mask
or hide the content and automatically reloads the page to ensure the changes take effect,
providing smooth and ongoing protection throughout the user's browsing session.
Significance of the Study
The continuous expansion of social media and online communication will
inevitably correlate with an intensified proliferation of digital toxicity, which encompasses
cyber-aggression, harassment, and abusive behaviors. Unlike traditional offline conflicts,
these digital threats will propagate at a scale and speed that overwhelm conventional
moderation, necessitating a shift from reactive reporting to proactive, client-side
intervention. This study aims to develop a real-time cyber-aggression detection and
mitigation system using a Chromium-based browser extension that combines Naive
Bayes classification and VADER sentiment analysis. The system contributes to the
creation
of
a
more
secure
and
encouraging
online
browsing
environment
by
automatically identifying and hiding aggressive text before users see it.
This research advocates for safer online interactions through the implementation
of a lightweight, privacy-preserving detection framework, ensuring that user data remains
on the local device. The results of this study enhance browser-based safety tools and


=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
8
illustrate the effective application of machine learning and sentiment analysis for real-
time content moderation.
Digital Safety Advocates and Educators. The findings of this research contribute to
the ongoing efforts to promote safer online environments. This study may serve as a
reference for organizations and educators concentrating on digital well-being and online
safety in formulating strategies and tools to assist users in evading harmful content and
cyber-aggressive behavior.
End Users. The main beneficiaries of this study are end users who often visit websites
with comment sections, interact on social media, or view other user-generated content.
The suggested Chromium-based browser extension helps lower exposure to harmful
user-generated text by automatically filtering or hiding toxic text. This enables users to
navigate the internet more safely and easily without frequently coming across abusive
language.
Future Researchers. This study provides a foundation for future research in cyber-
aggression detection, sentiment analysis, and browser-based security tools. Future
researchers could enhance this work by incorporating advanced machine learning
models, enabling multilingual support, analyzing multimedia content, or adapting the
system for additional browsers.
Software Developers and Extension Developers. This study offers insights into the
development of lightweight browser extensions that employ machine learning and
sentiment analysis for real-time text filtering. The findings can serve as a reference for
the
creation
of
privacy-focused
moderation
tools
and
browser-based
security
applications. Furthermore, the research demonstrates the integration of algorithms such
as Naive Bayes and VADER into client-side systems while preserving efficient
performance.
The Researchers. This study enhances researchers' understanding of machine learning,
sentiment analysis, browser extension development, and real-time content filtering. The


=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
9
research experience further develops technical skills in natural language processing,
system design, and cybersecurity applications.
CHAPTER II
REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE AND STUDIES
This chapter presents a variety of foreign and local literature and studies on real-
time cyber-aggression detection and mitigation on online platforms. It focuses on
supervised machine learning and sentiment analysis techniques, specifically Naive
Bayes and VADER. It analyzes how they may be integrated into a Chromium-based
browser extension to protect people from potentially hazardous content while browsing
the web.
Conceptual Literature
Standard Features
The proposed application will include several standard features to ensure
effective real-time detection of cyber aggression and user protection. It will incorporate a
real-time DOM (Document Object Model) scanner that will continuously extract and
analyze textual content from web pages [20], along with an automated filtering
mechanism that hides or blurs detected aggressive content to prevent immediate
exposure [16]. The blocklist ensures that specified terms are always treated as harmful
and filtered, while the whitelist prevents selected words from being hidden, even if the
detection model flags them. These features will be designed to operate efficiently within
the browser environment, ensuring lightweight performance and real-time response [17],
while maintaining seamless integration without disrupting the user's browsing experience.


=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
10
When developing the application, several key considerations must be taken into
account. The system must be designed to handle dynamic web content, as many
modern websites load and update content asynchronously, requiring the DOM scanner
to continuously monitor changes rather than performing a single scan upon page load.
Developers must also consider the computational limitations of a browser extension
environment, ensuring that the hybrid detection model is optimized to run efficiently on
the client side without consuming excessive memory or processing resources [17].
Furthermore, the accuracy of the detection model depends heavily on the quality and
diversity of the training data used for the Naive Bayes classifier, as the dataset must be
representative of real-world cyber-aggressive language across different online contexts.
Privacy is another critical consideration, as all text processing must occur locally on the
client side to avoid transmitting user data to external servers, thereby preserving user
confidentiality and trust [16]. Finally, cross-browser compatibility and adherence to
browser extension development standards, particularly those set by the Chromium
extension development framework, must be observed to ensure the system's reliability
and accessibility across all supported Chromium-based browsers, namely Google
Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Brave, and Opera.
Guidelines for Using the Algorithms
According to Hutto and Gilbert [8], the VADER algorithm serves as the primary
engine for understanding the intensity of emotion in short, informal text. To implement
this effectively, the system must follow specific linguistic guidelines, such as accounting
for capitalization, punctuation, and degree modifiers like "extremely," which amplify the
sentiment score. While VADER assesses the emotional tone of the message, the Naive
Bayes classifier serves as the categorical judge, calculating the probability that a specific
set of words belongs to a toxic or aggressive category based on prior training data [24],
[25]. The fundamental guideline for this hybrid approach is synergy: VADER identifies
the emotional heat, while Naive Bayes determines whether that heat indicates actual
aggression or harassment [8]. Conceptually, this hybrid framework is designed to
optimize classification performance beyond what single-algorithm approaches can


=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
11
achieve, ensuring that the system can distinguish between harmless sentiment and
genuine cyber-aggression with higher accuracy.
User-Centric Design
The literature emphasizes that the tool's technical success is secondary to its
interaction capability and user-centric design [12]. Online harassment takes many forms,
suggesting that a one-size-fits-all filter may be ineffective. Developers should prioritize a
design that empowers users rather than controls them—an essential aspect of functional
suitability—by providing clear notifications explaining why a post was hidden and
allowing users to reveal content if they choose [16]. Testing must involve real-world
scenarios to ensure the system effectively balances precision, which avoids false
accusations of aggression, and recall, which ensures actual attacks are not missed [8].
By focusing on the F1-score as a balanced metric, the system aims to create a digital
environment that feels genuinely safer without compromising the browsing experience
[10], [14].
Testing Tools and Procedure
The performance of the proposed system will be assessed using standard
machine learning metrics, specifically focusing on precision, recall, and F1-score [23].
These metrics are commonly used to evaluate classification models and provide a
balanced measurement of system performance in text analysis tasks. The study ensures
a more rigorous evaluation of how well the system identifies true cyber-aggressive
content while minimizing false alarms. This quantitative data directly supports the user
and IT expert assessments regarding the system's functional suitability, performance
efficiency, and reliability, fulfilling the core objectives outlined in the Statement of the
Problem.
Research Literature
Review of Related Literature


=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
12
Cyber-aggression Detection
Cyber-aggression is a growing problem in online spaces, especially on social
media and content-creation platforms. It includes harassment, hate speech, threats, and
abusive language, all of which pose potential dangers or are detrimental to the safety
and mental well-being of users. Studies have shown that aggression is more prevalent in
environments where online anonymity and diminished personal responsibility exist. To
mitigate this and the associated dangers, researchers have begun to develop tools that
automatically assess the potential risk of mental harm to users who access the web.
Machine learning is often used to detect cyber-aggression. Naga and Lavilles [1]
examined cyberbullying in Filipino tweets and found that supervised learning models
could classify aggressive and non-aggressive tweets using text mining. They pointed out
that language specific models have a greater impact. Similarly, Kumari, Yadav, and
Kargutkar [10] used cyberbullying detection models and achieved successful outcomes
due to the relevance of feature selection and preparation.
Subtle and context-specific cyber aggression has become the battleground of the
current studies. Antisdel, Miller and Groves [4] pointed out that the monotonic online
harassment can most of the time be dismissed and this includes sarcasm, coded
messages, and indirect aggression. A similar situation was reported by Labrague [2] in
the Philippine environment and attributed it to the absence of sufficient control systems
in the online environment, which can aggravate the situation. These studies affirm that in
order to be able to recognize the aggressiveness of the content, the system must go
beyond the mere detection of keywords, to the contextual and emotional dimensions of
the content. Data reviewed in this research show that aggressiveness in content can be
detected more efficiently and in real time by combining statistical classification and
sentiment analysis.
Naive Bayes for Text Classification


=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
13
Naive Bayes is a type of machine learning algorithm that uses Bayes’ Theorem to
classify text based on certain features and attributes of that text. Though it is simplistic
and assumes features are independent, Naive Bayes often performs well for classifying
text, especially on large scale datasets like social media posts. Kumari et al. [10]
discovered that Naive Bayes, when used with good preprocessing, works well for
cyberbullying detection. Using Naive Bayes to classify Facebook comments, Ashari [3]
found these probabilistic models suitable for classification of short and informal messy
text.
According to Nahar et al. [6] state that one of the reasons machine learning has
remained popular is because of its simplicity and speed. Lidder [9] showed that Naive
Bayes outperformed the K-Nearest Neighbors classification algorithm in some cases
when sentiment-based features were added to Naive Bayes. It is also evident that Naive
Bayes is a suitable choice for lightweight applications like browser plugins because it is
fast and accurate when classifying text as it can help processes that need to turn text
features into numerical values in a short period of time.
VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntiment Reasoner)
VADER is a rule-based sentiment analysis tool and is tailored to short informal
text such as social media posts. It also differs from previous tools and consider several
nuances of social media text such as, punctuation, capitalization, modifiers, slang, and
emoticons. Because of this, it is suitable for social media applications. Gandy et al. [7]
proved that sentiment analysis based on the lexicon works well in large datasets while
also being easy to scale and understand.
A number of studies have stated using machine learning with sentiment analysis
shows improvement in the performance of detection. Ashari [3] fused VADER scores
with Naive Bayes and gained a boost in accuracy in classification. Lidder [9] argues
inclusion of sentiment intensity in features increases the performance of supervised
learning models in comparison to classical bag-of-words. According to Purkayastha et al.
[11] the inclusion of affective features helps in the detection of abusive language to a
great extent. The above findings lead to the conclusion that the use of sentiment analysis


=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
14
and probabilistic classification would be beneficial in improving cyber aggression
detection.
Browser Extension Systems for Real-Time Online Safety
Browser extensions enhance the functionality of web browsers by directly
manipulating the content of web pages via the DOM (Document Object Model). They
have the capability to read, modify, and remove content on the fly without the need for
operations on the server, which provides functionality in real time. V. J., Jagadish, and
George [5] built a browser extension for machine learning based phishing detection,
proving the feasibility of client-side classification. Zhang and Park [24] suggested an AI-
based harmful text and image detection using deep learning, demonstrating the
feasibility of browser-based safety tools. The research shows a need for lightweight, fully
client-side
systems
that
combine
probabilistic
machine
learning
with
rule-based
sentiment analysis for real-time cyber aggression detection. This study aims to fill that
gap by developing a Chromium-based browser extension that uses both Naive Bayes
and VADER.
Review of Related Studies
Limitations of Single-Algorithm Detection Models
Early methods for cyber-aggression detection primarily utilized single-algorithm
models, including Naive Bayes classifiers and rule-based sentiment analysis. Although
these approaches efficiently classified textual data, they frequently failed to address the
complexity of online communication, especially in detecting subtle aggression such as
sarcasm and indirect hostility. Kumari et al. [10] found that while Naive Bayes models are
effective
for
explicit
cyberbullying,
they
lack
contextual
depth
when
applied
independently. Khan et al. [14] similarly observed that sentiment analysis tools may


=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
15
misinterpret neutral or ambiguous language due to reliance on predefined lexicons.
These limitations underscore the necessity for integrated approaches that combine
probabilistic classification with sentiment-based analysis to enhance detection accuracy.
Hybrid Approaches in Cyber-Aggression Detection
Recent research has investigated hybrid models that integrate machine learning
techniques with sentiment analysis to improve the detection of harmful online content.
Sharma and Singh [15] introduced a hybrid cyberbullying detection framework that
combines Naive Bayes with sentiment analysis, achieving superior performance
compared to single-method models. Their results suggest that integrating classification
algorithms with emotional tone analysis enables systems to better interpret both the
structure and intent of textual data. Patel and Mehta [17] also demonstrated that
combining multiple detection techniques increases accuracy and enhances the handling
of context-dependent language. These findings support the methodology of the present
study, which employs a hybrid model incorporating Naive Bayes and VADER for more
reliable, context-aware cyber-aggression detection.
Real-Time Browser-Based Detection Systems
The emergence of browser-based detection tools has shifted the landscape of
real-time content moderation. In contrast to traditional server-side systems, browser
extensions enable detection directly on the user's device, enhancing privacy and
reducing response time. Lee et al. [16] demonstrated the effectiveness of real-time toxic
comment detection through a browser-based natural language processing extension,
indicating that client-side processing significantly reduces latency. Akhter and Ahmed [30]
further emphasized the importance of DOM (Document Object Model) manipulation for
real-time filtering, allowing dynamic modification of webpage content without requiring a
page reload. These findings are consistent with the present study's implementation of a
Chromium-based browser extension that conducts local text analysis and applies
immediate mitigation using DOM-based content masking.


=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
16
Challenges in Detecting Contextual and Evolving Online Language
A significant challenge in cyber-aggression detection is the dynamic nature of
online language and the prevalence of indirect or coded expressions. Vogels [12]
observed that online harassment frequently involves nuanced communication that
traditional automated systems struggle to detect. Nandwani and Verma [29] also
identified difficulties faced by sentiment analysis models in interpreting sarcasm, slang,
and rapidly evolving linguistic patterns, which diminishes detection accuracy. Salawu et
al. [28] further highlighted the limitations of current automated systems in adapting to
emerging forms of online aggression. These challenges underscore the necessity for
ongoing refinement of detection models and validate the present study's approach, which
seeks to balance efficiency and adaptability through a hybrid, client-side solution.
Theoretical Background
This study will use the Theory of Probabilistic Classification to rapidly identify
dangerous information. The theory supports real-time protection by treating each word in
a user-generated text sample as separate evidence [24]. The algorithm uses the Naive
Bayes method to determine the likelihood that a collection of words is aggressive rather
than safe [25]. Since this strategy relies on simple probability rather than sophisticated
rules, the
Chromium-based browser extension can make quick decisions as users
scroll, detecting harmful content before they fully read it [26].


=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
17
Figure 1. Theoretical Framework of TPC and ACT [24], [31]
In addition to statistical methodologies, this study employs Affective Computing
Theory, which enables technology to understand and analyze human emotions [20]. This
theory serves as basis for VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary and Sentiment Reasoner)
component of the study. Unlike traditional methods that merely count word frequency,
Affective Computing allows the system to determine the emotional tone of user-
generated text by evaluating indicators such as all-caps, strong punctuation (!!!), and
emojis [1]. By considering digital language as emotional expression, the system will be
able to determine between neutral user-generated text and hostile textual attacks,
making moderation more sensitive to conversational tone [28].


=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
18
By combining these two theories, the study shows that efficient automated
moderation requires both statistical reasoning and emotional sensitivity. This method
presents the Chromium-based browser extension as a digital intermediary, connecting
data analysis to user safety [29]. The technology employs probability and sentiment
scores to respond immediately within the browser's DOM (Document Object Model),
which is the structure of a webpage [30]. If user-generated text is detected as cyber-
aggressive, the extension can blur or hide it immediately. This methodology transforms
research from simple observation to active prevention of harm by changing what users
see on their screens [31].
Conceptual Framework
The conceptual framework of the study follows an Input–Process–Output (IPO)
model with a feedback loop, representing how textual data is transformed into real-time
cyber-aggression mitigation within a Chromium-based browser extension environment. It
integrates
probabilistic
classification
(Naive
Bayes)
and
lexicon-
and
rule-based
sentiment analysis (VADER) to operationalize the study’s objectives.


=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
19
Figure 2. Conceptual Framework of the Study. [14], [8], [30]
This figure depicts the conceptual framework of the real-time cyber-aggression
detection and mitigation system, illustrating the processes by which raw textual content
from web pages is transformed into automatically hidden or filtered aggressive content
within a Chromium-based browser extension environment. Rather than treating cyber-
aggression detection as a simple keyword matching task, the framework conceptualizes
it as a hybrid analytical pipeline in which text is simultaneously evaluated for statistical
probability and emotional intensity. The pipeline is divided into four stages: Input,
Process, Output, and Feedback Loop.
The process begins with Input. The system utilizes three types of data sources.
First, labeled cyber-aggression datasets are collections of user-generated text samples
annotated as aggressive or non-aggressive, serving as the training ground for the Naive
Bayes classifier. Second, live user-generated text are captured in real time from social
media platforms and forums via the Chromium-based browser's Document Object Model
(DOM), representing the actual text the extension analyzes during normal browsing
across all supported Chromium-based browsers, namely Google Chrome, Microsoft
Edge, Brave, and Opera. Third, text preprocessing resources include tokenizers, stop-
word lists, and normalization rules used to clean and standardize raw text before
analysis. During this stage, raw text is preprocessed to make it more applicable to the
classifier, enabling it to focus on the parts of the text that correspond to actual cyber-
aggression.
In the second phase, the Process stage, five sequential steps are executed inside
the Chromium-based browser extension. Step one is text preprocessing, where raw
user-generated text is cleaned, tokenized, and stripped of irrelevant elements, such as
stop-words and punctuation. Step two is Naive Bayes classification, which calculates the
probability that the text sample belongs to the aggressive class based on word patterns
learned from the training data. Step three is VADER sentiment scoring, running in
parallel with Naive Bayes to compute the text's emotional polarity and intensity, taking


=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
20
into account cues such as capitalization, punctuation, modifiers, slang, and emoticons.
Step four is hybrid decision integration, combining the outputs from Naive Bayes and
VADER using a threshold-based rule to determine if the text is cyber-aggressive. Step
five is real-time filtering, where the final decision is made; text classified as aggressive is
automatically hidden or blurred across all supported Chromium-based browsers, while
non-aggressive content remains visible. The system reduces instability introduced by
relying on a single detection method when the meaning of a user-generated text sample
depends upon both statistical patterns and emotional tone.
The Output stage delivers four results. First, the aggressive or non-aggressive
classification is the final label assigned to each processed user-generated text sample.
Second, the VADER sentiment polarity and intensity scores are logged to understand the
emotional characteristics of detected aggression. Third, automatically hidden or filtered
content appears as the visible mitigation effect on the webpage. Fourth, performance
evaluation
metrics
consisting
of
precision,
recall,
and
F1-score
measure
the
effectiveness of the hybrid detection model as stated in research question 2.
The Feedback Loop connects Output back to Process. Performance metrics and
error analyses iteratively refine the system by adjusting text preprocessing strategies,
retuning Naive Bayes parameters and feature sets, and modifying VADER and hybrid
decision thresholds. This cyclical refinement supports model optimization and threshold
adjustment, allowing the system to improve detection accuracy and mitigation reliability
over time. The methodology allows for an apples-to-apples comparison between single-
algorithm approaches (Naive Bayes alone and VADER alone) and the hybrid condition,
while not presupposing that the hybrid approach is necessary.
Synthesis
The reviewed literature demonstrates a significant transition in cyber-aggression
prevention from traditional manual moderation and keyword-based filtering to intelligent,


=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
21
automated detection systems. Earlier methods are predominantly reactive, relying on
user reports or static rules, which limit their effectiveness against subtle, context-
dependent, and rapidly evolving forms of online harassment. Consequently, there is a
pronounced need for real-time systems capable of dynamically analyzing and detecting
harmful content before dissemination.
Recent studies underscore the growing adoption of machine learning techniques,
particularly Naive Bayes, due to their efficiency and reliable performance in text
classification. However, purely statistical models frequently fail to capture emotional tone
and linguistic subtleties. In contrast, sentiment analysis tools such as VADER effectively
interpret emotional context, especially in short, informal online texts. These findings
indicate that integrating machine learning with sentiment analysis within a hybrid
framework enhances detection accuracy and contextual comprehension.
The literature further emphasizes the necessity of real-time monitoring and
prompt intervention. While browser-based tools provide practical client-side monitoring,
many current systems depend on server-side processing, which can introduce delays,
raise privacy concerns, and reduce performance. Despite advancements in technology,
a gap persists in integrating efficient machine learning, sentiment analysis, and real-time
mitigation into a fully client-side browser extension.
To address this gap, the present study proposes a Chromium-based browser
extension that will integrate Naive Bayes classification with VADER sentiment analysis.
By combining probabilistic and sentiment-based methodologies within a lightweight,
privacy-preserving system, the proposed solution seeks to deliver accurate, real-time
cyber-aggression detection and immediate mitigation, thereby contributing to safer online
communication environments.


=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
22
Definition of Terms
To help readers understand this study, the researchers have defined the key terms
below. Each term is explained both in general and in technical terms.
Conceptual Terms
Terms
Definitions
Application
Programming
Interface
(Chromium-based
browser extension API)
Built-in
programming
interface
provided
by
the
Chromium-based browser that allows the extension
to access tabs, storage, and runtime functions [18].
Client-Side Processing
The execution of scripts and algorithms on the user's
local machine rather than a central server reduces
latency and preserves privacy [19].
Document
Object
Model
(DOM)
Programming
interface
for
web
documents
representing the page as a tree structure, allowing
scripts to access and modify content, structure, and
style dynamically [20].
F1-score
The harmonic mean of precision and recall provides
a
balanced
measure
of
the
model's
overall
performance and accuracy [23].
Hybrid Detection Model
A framework integrating Naive Bayes and VADER to
improve the accuracy of identifying harmful content
compared to using a single method [15].
Naive Bayes Classifier
A probabilistic classifier based on Bayes’ theorem
that assumes features are independent given the
class label [21].


=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
23
Precision
The ratio of correctly predicted positive observations
to
the
total
predicted
positive
observations,
measuring the exactness of the classifier [32].
Recall
The ratio of correctly predicted positive observations
to all observations in the actual class, measuring the
completeness of the detection [33].
Valence
Aware
Dictionary
and
sEntiment
Reasoner
(VADER)
A rule-based sentiment analysis model that uses a
predefined lexicon and linguistic rules to determine
the sentiment of text, especially in social media [8].
Operational Terms
Terms
Definitions
Chromium-based browser
extension
A software add-on built on the Chromium engine that
adds features to webpages across Chromium-based
browsers such as Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge,
Brave, and Opera, such as real-time cyber-aggression
detection.
Cyber-Aggression
Aggressive online behavior conducted through digital
platforms that is intended to harm, insult, or negatively
impact another person or group, including acts such as
harassment,
hate
speech,
threats,
and
abusive
language.
Machine Learning (ML)
A branch of computer science that enables systems to
learn patterns from data and make predictions without
being explicitly programmed; conceptually used here to


=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
24
detect cyber-aggression.
Mitigation
Actions taken to reduce or prevent the negative effects
of
cyber-aggressive
content,
such
as
automatically
hiding or filtering it.
Real-Time Detection
The immediate identification of cyber-aggressive content
as it appears online, allowing actions to be taken before
users view it.
Sentiment Analysis
A
technique
in
natural
language
processing
that
analyzes textual data to determine emotional tone
(positive, negative, or neutral) expressed in content.


=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
25
CHAPTER III
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
This chapter presents the research methodology used in the study. It describes the
research design, research locale, the study’s respondents, and the procedures for data
collection and system evaluation. This chapter also explains the methods and processes
to be used by the researchers to ensure that the development and assessment of the
proposed cyber-aggression detection system will be conducted systematically and
reliably.
Research Design
This study utilizes a quantitative descriptive research design to develop and
evaluate a real-time cyber-aggression detection and mitigation system implemented as a
Chromium-based browser extension. Quantitative research involves collecting and
analyzing numerical data to measure variables, while descriptive research systematically
characterizes the features and performance of a system without manipulating variables.
This design is appropriate as it enables quantification of the proposed hybrid model’s
effectiveness and provides a detailed account of system performance in real-time
browsing environments.
The chosen research design aligns with the study’s objectives, particularly the
development of a system that integrates Naive Bayes classification and VADER
sentiment analysis. The effectiveness of the hybrid model in detecting cyber-aggressive
content is measured using performance metrics such as precision, recall, and F1-score.
Naive Bayes is widely adopted for text classification due to its efficiency and reliability in
processing textual data [25]. In contrast, VADER is a rule-based sentiment analysis tool
optimized for social media language and informal text [8]. By combining these methods,


=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
26
the study quantitatively assesses whether the hybrid framework enhances detection
capability.
Additionally,
the
descriptive
component
allows
for assessment
of system
performance under real-world browsing conditions. The system scans webpage content
via the Document Object Model (DOM), enabling real-time detection and automatic
masking of harmful text. This approach addresses the research focus on responsiveness,
efficiency, and
reliability. DOM-based
processing enables dynamic analysis and
modification of content without requiring page reloads, which is critical for continuous,
seamless protection during browsing [20], [32].
The study will also gather quantitative data from two respondent groups: end
users and IT experts. End users will evaluate the system regarding functional suitability,
interaction capability, performance efficiency, and reliability, while IT experts will assess
functional suitability, interaction capability, maintainability, and reliability. Structured
questionnaires and Likert-scale responses will be used to compute weighted means and
to describe both user and expert perceptions of system quality.
In summary, the quantitative descriptive research design is justified, as it
facilitates a measurable, objective, and systematic evaluation of both the detection
performance and the user-centered quality of the proposed system. Emphasizing
numerical indicators and descriptive analysis enables the determination of the system’s
effectiveness
in
delivering
real-time,
client-side
cyber-aggression
detection
and
mitigation while maintaining efficiency, usability, and reliability.
Research Locale
The research will be conducted in the Province of Laguna. This locale was
selected because Laguna is one of the most highly urbanized and digitally connected
provinces in the CALABARZON region, characterized by rapid industrialization, strong


=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
27
educational infrastructure, and widespread internet accessibility. According to reports
from the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) [35] and the Department of Information and
Communications
Technology
(DICT)
[36],
CALABARZON—including
Laguna—
consistently records high levels of internet penetration and digital engagement due to its
concentration of urban centers, academic institutions, and technology-driven industries.
This makes Laguna an appropriate setting for examining online user behavior in a
digitally active environment.
Laguna also has a diverse population composed of students, professionals, and
active internet users who frequently engage with various online platforms such as social
media, news websites, forums, and educational portals. This high level of digital activity
increases exposure to user-generated content, including potentially harmful or cyber-
aggressive text, making it suitable for studying online interaction patterns. Conducting
the study in this province allows for a broader and more representative evaluation of the
developed Chromium-based browser extension in real-world browsing conditions across
both urban and semi-urban areas, thereby improving the relevance, applicability, and
generalizability of the findings in enhancing online safety tools for Filipino users.
Respondents of the Study
Participants in this study are divided into two distinct groups to facilitate
evaluation of the cyber-aggression detection system from both user and technical
perspectives. The first group, End Users, comprises thirty (30) individuals from the local
community who are frequent internet users. The researchers will strictly select
participants who are 18 years of age or older and reside within the defined research
locale of Laguna. These participants regularly use Chromium-based browsers and
engage with online platforms that display publicly accessible user-generated text,
including social media platforms such as Facebook, X (formerly Twitter), YouTube, and
Reddit, as well as blogs, news sites, and other web-based platforms where user-
generated commentary is prevalent. Their participation is essential for assessing the
extension's performance during typical browsing and its effectiveness in masking harmful


=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
28
language for general users. A sample of thirty (30) end users was deemed appropriate
as it satisfies the statistical baseline required to achieve a normal distribution for
quantitative Likert-scale analysis, while remaining small enough to allow the researchers
to conduct highly controlled, closely observed usability testing sessions. Their feedback
will focus on interface clarity and ease of use. The second group, IT Experts, consists of
ten (10) professionals with backgrounds in systems analysis, software architecture, and
quality assurance. These experts are selected for their capacity to provide technical
feedback on the system's structure, with particular attention to long-term stability and
maintainability. A smaller group of ten (10) is considered adequate for technical
evaluation, as expert assessments are characterized by depth and precision rather than
volume, and a focused group of qualified professionals is sufficient to yield meaningful
insights into the system's code quality and architectural soundness.
Participants were selected from locally educated internet users and the region's
expanding community of technology professionals. While engagement with online
comment sections is widespread, this study specifically targets individuals who utilize
desktop browser extensions to enhance security and manage online content.
Purposive sampling, a non-probability sampling method, will be employed to
select participants. This approach is appropriate because the study will require
respondents with specific qualifications, such as technical expertise for the IT group and
active engagement with comment-enabled online platforms for the end users, rather than
a random sample of the general population. This strategy ensures that the collected
feedback is directly relevant to the research's technical objectives. The total sample size
of forty (40) enables a focused evaluation that balances the breadth of user experience
feedback with the depth of professional technical assessment.
Table 1. Respondents of the Study
Category
Number of Respondents
End Users
30


=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
29
IT Experts
10
Total
40
Table 1 outlines the distribution of the 40 total respondents selected to evaluate
the developed cyber-aggression detection browser extension. The evaluators are
intentionally divided into two distinct groups to ensure a comprehensive assessment of
the system based on ISO 25010 software quality standards.
Data Gathering Procedures
The Data Gathering Procedures for this study are structured as a continuous
progression from the technical development of the detection model to its practical
validation within the user community. This narrative approach ensures that empirical
data acquisition follows a logical sequence, transitioning from
initial algorithmic training
to a human-centered evaluation of the system’s performance.
The process will begin with the collection of a specialized dataset consisting of
aggressive and non-aggressive text samples sourced from public social media platforms
and established academic databases. These linguistic samples will then be integrated
with emotional intensity values derived from the VADER sentiment lexicon to simulate
the complex nuances of online cyber-aggression. This processed data will subsequently
be used to train the Naive Bayes classifier, creating a unified detection engine capable of
identifying harmful patterns across both specific language markers and underlying
sentiment intensity.
The second stage of the procedure focuses on determining the system's
classification accuracy and technical robustness. By using a held-out test set containing
data previously unseen by the model, the researchers will extract vital performance
metrics, including precision, recall, and the F1-score. This internal validation phase is
critical for establishing a mathematical baseline, allowing the researchers to statistically


=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
30
verify the effectiveness of the proposed hybrid system in correctly identifying aggression
while minimizing false detections. The results from these experimental trials provide the
foundational proof needed to demonstrate that the combined detection approach
successfully identifies online toxicity before its deployment in a live environment.
Following this, the Chromium-based browser extension will be introduced to a target
group of users to observe its real-time performance and to document the speed and
accuracy of the automatic mitigation responses.
The final stage involves the consolidating and synthesizing all technical and
evaluative information gathered throughout the study. Quantitative data from the
performance tests—specifically precision, recall, and the F1-score—will be analyzed
alongside the results from the participant surveys to establish the overall effectiveness of
the detection system. These results are further enriched by the qualitative insights from
user observations and feedback, identify specific areas where the interface or the
detection logic can be optimized. This comprehensive approach ensures that the study's
conclusions are supported by a rigorous blend of computational metrics and practical
human-centered evaluation, confirming the tool’s viability as a real-time solution for
cyber-aggression management.
Instrumentation
The main instrument used in this study is a survey questionnaire developed to
gather assessments from end users and IT experts regarding the proposed Chromium-
based browser extension. The questionnaire uses a four-point Likert scale with the
following options: Strongly Agree (4), Agree (3), Disagree (2), and Strongly Disagree (1).
Two versions of the questionnaire were created. The first version is for 30 end users and
assesses the browser extension in terms of functional suitability, interaction capability,
performance efficiency, and reliability based on their browsing experience. The second
version is for 10 IT experts and assesses the system in terms of functional suitability,
interaction capability, maintainability, and reliability based on their technical evaluation.


=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
31
The questionnaire will be reviewed by IT professionals before distribution to ensure
content validity, item clarity, and alignment with the research objectives. Feedback from
the validators will be used to enhance and finalize the instrument. The respondents will
complete the questionnaire after interacting with the system under controlled conditions,
providing measurable feedback based on their experience with the Chromium-based
browser extension.
Validation
The validation of the research system is conducted through a structured, two-
phase
process
comprising
Internal
Algorithmic
Testing
and
External
Evaluative
Validation to establish the credibility and robustness of the findings, directly addressing
the research questions outlined in the statement of the problem. The Internal Validation
phase measures the technical accuracy of the detection logic by exposing the hybrid
Naive Bayes and VADER model to a standardized test dataset of aggressive and neutral
comments. During this phase, three primary performance metrics are extracted to
address research question 2: precision, which quantifies the exactness of the classifier in
identifying only truly aggressive content; recall, which measures the system's ability to
detect all instances of aggression; and the F1-score, which provides a harmonic mean of
precision and recall to ensure balanced classification robustness.
The External Validation phase focuses on the functional performance of the
Chromium-based browser extension in live browsing environments, addressing research
questions 3 and 4 by employing direct user observation and structured testing sessions
to monitor the extension's ability to intercept and mask harmful content in accordance
with ISO 25010 standards. Feedback is collected from two distinct respondent groups:
thirty (30) end users who assess the extension based on practical browsing experience,
and ten (10) IT experts who provide technical evaluations based on professional


=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
32
expertise in software engineering and data science using a four-point Likert scale survey
instrument. By synthesizing the technical results of precision, recall, and F1-score with
the practical findings from user and expert evaluations, the validation process confirms
that the hybrid detection system is technically sound, practically effective, and ready for
deployment.
Discussions on Algorithms/Mathematical Concepts Used/Proposed Solutions
The proposed real-time cyber-aggression detection and mitigation system will be
built upon a hybrid computational framework: a Naive Bayes probabilistic classifier for
content categorization and the Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntiment Reasoner
(VADER)
for
sentiment
intensity
analysis
[8],
[15].
This
section
discusses
the
foundational concepts, design rationale, mathematical foundations, and step-by-step
implementation strategy of these algorithms within a browser-based environment [16],
[20], as well as the performance metrics used to evaluate their combined effectiveness in
mitigating online toxicity [23].
Fundamentals of the Algorithms/Mathematical Model/Formula
The primary problem this system aims to solve is the exposure of users to cyber-
aggressive content in real time while browsing the internet. Most existing moderation
systems rely on servers — meaning the harmful text must first be sent to an external
computer for analysis before any action is taken, which causes delays and leaves the
user already exposed to the harmful content [13]. The proposed algorithm addresses this
by moving the entire detection process directly into the user's browser, so harmful
content can be caught and hidden the moment it appears on screen, without sending any
data to an outside server [20].


=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
33
The inputs of this model are the raw text strings — meaning the plain, unedited
sentences and comments — that are pulled directly from a webpage's visible content as
the user browses social media sites [20]. To understand where this text comes from:
every webpage is built from a structure called the Document Object Model (DOM), which
is simply the organized layout of everything visible on a page, including text, images, and
buttons. The algorithm reads text directly from this structure. The outputs of the model
are two things: a classification label that identifies whether a piece of text is aggressive
or safe, and the automatic triggering of a blur effect that hides the flagged content from
the user's view [30]. The key variables that drive the decision are the probability score,
which measures how likely a set of words belongs to an aggressive category based on
past examples, and the sentiment intensity score, which measures how emotionally
negative or hostile the tone of a sentence is [8].
In general terms, the method works as a dual-verification system — meaning it
checks the text in two different ways at the same time before making a decision. The first
check uses an emotional dictionary called VADER, which looks at the words and tone of
the text and assigns a score based on how aggressive or negative it sounds. The second
check uses a mathematical method called Naive Bayes, which looks at the specific
words used and calculates the likelihood that those word patterns match known
examples of cyber-aggression. Both checks produce a score, and those two scores are
then combined into one final score. If the final score is high enough, the system decides
the content is aggressive and hides it. If the score is low, the content is considered safe
and the user's browsing continues normally — all of this happens instantly, without the
user needing to do anything [15].
To illustrate, imagine a user browsing a social media platform and coming across
the comment: "You are so stupid and worthless!" The moment this text appears on the
page, the system automatically extracts it from the webpage's structure and cleans it by
removing unnecessary characters. VADER then reads the emotional tone of the
sentence and assigns it a high negative score because of the strong insult words present
[8]. At the same time, the Naive Bayes classifier looks at the specific words used and


=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
34
calculates a high probability that they match the aggressive category, based on its
training data [24]. Since both scores exceed the defined threshold, the system
immediately applies a blur effect over the comment — visually hiding it before the user
has a chance to fully read it [17]. A small button also appears, giving the user the option
to reveal the hidden text if they choose. This example shows how the two-check
approach works together in real time to protect users from harmful content before it
reaches them [15].
Theoretical Foundations
The proposed solution is theoretically grounded in Bayesian probability and rule-
based sentiment analysis, ensuring that the detection system is scientifically justified
rather than a trial-and-error approach. The first cornerstone is Bayes' Theorem, which
underpins the Naive Bayes classifier by calculating the posterior probability of a
sentence being aggressive based on the prior likelihood of its constituent words. This
principle
is
particularly
effective
for
real-time
text
classification
due
to
its
low
computational cost and high scalability, as demonstrated in previous research by Naga
and Lavilles [1] regarding cyberbullying detection. The second theoretical foundation is
the Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntiment Reasoner (VADER), a specialized lexicon-
based model developed by Hutto and Gilbert [8] specifically for the nuances of social
media language, such as emojis, acronyms, and intensity modifiers. By adopting a hybrid
framework, this study draws inspiration from the work of Sharma and Singh [15], which
suggests that combining the emotional sensitivity of VADER with the categorical
precision of Naive Bayes results in a more robust detection tool. A primary assumption of
this method is the "naive" conditional independence of features, where each word is
treated as an independent contributor to the final classification, which simplifies the
complex nature of human language to maintain high-speed performance in a browser
extension. Additionally, the model is limited by its reliance on a pre-defined lexicon and
training data, meaning it may struggle with highly creative sarcasm or rapidly evolving


=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
35
internet slang that falls outside its existing database. Despite these constraints, the
logical reasoning behind this dual-layered approach is that the sentiment analysis acts
as a contextual filter that improves the decision-making accuracy of the probabilistic
classifier, thereby providing a more reliable safeguard for users.
Algorithm Design
The proposed real-time cyber-aggression detection and mitigation system follows
a structured, multi-stage workflow designed to operate entirely within the user's browser
[13], [20]. This design will be deliberately chosen to eliminate the need for server
communication, ensuring both speed and user privacy — two critical requirements that
existing server-dependent systems fail to address [13], [17]. The following section
explains the algorithm step by step, from the moment a user opens a web page to the
moment harmful content is hidden from view.


=== PDF PAGE 44 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
36
Figure 3. Algorithm Workflow for Cyber-Aggression Detection and Mitigation
Step 1 — Text Extraction (Input)
The algorithm begins as soon as the user loads or navigates a webpage. The
Chromium-based browser extension's content script continuously monitors the page's


=== PDF PAGE 45 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
37
Document Object Model (DOM), which is the underlying structure that organizes all
visible text and elements on a webpage [30]. The input at this stage consists of raw,
unfiltered text strings pulled directly from user-generated content areas such as
comment sections, posts, and reply threads [20]. This monitoring happens automatically
and does not require any action from the user.
Step 2 — Text Preprocessing (Intermediate Step)
Before any analysis takes place, the extracted text undergoes a cleaning process
to improve the accuracy of detection [8], [16]. This includes removing unnecessary
characters, extra whitespace, punctuation symbols, and irrelevant formatting. The result
of this step is a normalized text string that is ready to be analyzed. This preprocessing
stage is essential because raw text from social media often contains noise that can
interfere with accurate classification [10].
Step 3 — Parallel Analysis (Intermediate Step)
The cleaned text is simultaneously passed through two independent analysis
engines, running in parallel to maximize speed and accuracy [15]:
VADER Sentiment Analysis reads the emotional tone of the text and produces
a compound score ranging from −1.0 (highly negative or aggressive) to +1.0
(highly positive). VADER is specifically designed for informal social media
language and is sensitive to cues such as capitalization (e.g., "STUPID"), strong
punctuation (e.g., "!!!"), and emotionally charged words [8].
Naive Bayes Classifier calculates the mathematical probability that the word
patterns in the text belong to the "aggressive" category, based on training data
containing known examples of aggressive and non-aggressive language [8], [24].
It treats each word as an independent piece of evidence and computes a
posterior probability using Bayes' Theorem [24], [25].


=== PDF PAGE 46 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
38
Running both engines in parallel means the system does not need to wait for one
to finish before starting the other, making the detection process faster and more efficient
[8].
Step 4 — Risk Score Computation (Intermediate Step)
The outputs of both analysis engines are combined into a single unified Risk
Score using the following weighted formula [8], [15]:
Rscore = w1 × Pnb + w2 × Vcomp, subject to the constraint that w1 + w2 = 1
Where Pnb is the probability of aggression from the Naive Bayes classifier,
Vcomp is the compound sentiment score from VADER, and w1 and w2 are weighting
coefficients assigned based on empirical testing [21]. This formula ensures that neither
method alone determines the final result, and that both the emotional tone and the word-
pattern probability are considered together [15], [23].
Step 5 — Decision-Making Process
The system applies a decision rule based on the computed Risk Score [17], [21]:
If Rscore ≥0.5 →the content is classified as Aggressive
If Rscore < 0.5 →the content is classified as Non-Aggressive / Safe
The threshold of 0.5 was set based on empirical testing to balance sensitivity
(catching as much aggressive content as possible) and specificity (avoiding false
positives on harmless content) [23]. This decision point is the core of the algorithm's logic
and directly determines whether a mitigation action will be triggered [17].
Step 6 — Mitigation (Output)
If the content is flagged as aggressive, the extension immediately executes a
mitigation script that applies a CSS blur filter over the identified text, effectively hiding it


=== PDF PAGE 47 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
39
from the user's view before they have a chance to fully read it [30]. A "Reveal" button is
also displayed alongside the blurred content, allowing users to uncover it by choice if
they wish [17]. If the content is classified as safe, no action is taken and the user's
browsing continues uninterrupted.
Step 7 — Continuous Monitoring (Loop / Iteration)
Because modern web pages are dynamic — meaning new comments and posts
can load without a full page refresh — the algorithm does not stop after processing the
initial page content [20], [30]. Instead, it continuously monitors the DOM for any newly
loaded text. Every time new content appears, the entire process repeats from Step 1.
This iteration ensures that users remain protected throughout their entire browsing
session, not just when the page first loads [13], [20].
This step-by-step dual-verification structure was chosen for three key reasons.
First, relying on a single algorithm is insufficient — VADER alone may miss aggressive
content that uses uncommon words, while Naive Bayes alone may overlook content that
is emotionally charged but uses atypical phrasing [15], [17]. By combining both, each
method compensates for the other's weaknesses [15]. Second, running everything client-
side means there is no delay from server requests and no user data ever leaves the
browser, directly addressing the privacy and performance gaps identified in existing
systems [13], [14]. Third, the continuous DOM monitoring loop ensures the system
adapts to dynamic web content, making it practical for real-world social media platforms
that load content incrementally [20], [30].
Mathematical Model Formulation
The precision of the proposed cyber-aggression detection system is formalized
through a hybrid mathematical framework that quantifies linguistic probability and


=== PDF PAGE 48 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
40
emotional intensity. The primary objective function of this model is to generate a
definitive Risk Score (Rscore​
) for every text string (T) captured from the browser’s
Document Object Model (DOM). The formulation defines several critical parameters:
Pnb​
represents the posterior probability of aggression calculated by the Naive Bayes
engine, while Vcomp​
denotes the VADER Compound Score, a normalized value
ranging from -1.0 (highly aggressive) to +1.0 (highly positive). To balance these two
distinct analytical methods, the model utilizes weighting coefficients, w1​
and w2​
,
which are assigned based on empirical testing to ensure that neither probabilistic
frequency nor lexical sentiment disproportionately skews the final result.
The core equation governing the system’s decision-making is expressed as a weighted
linear combination:
under the constraint that w1​
+w2​
=1. The Naive Bayes component utilizes a
multinomial distribution where the probability of a class given a specific comment is
calculated as:
This allows the system to determine the likelihood of aggression based on historical
word-frequency patterns stored in the extension's local JSON database. Simultaneously,
the VADER scoring logic applies a series of heuristics—including intensifiers and
contrastive conjunctions—to determine the emotional valence. The final classification
boundary is set at a threshold of 0.5; any input yielding an Rscore greater than or equal
to 0.5 is mathematically categorized as "Aggressive," triggering an immediate mitigation
response through CSS blurring, whereas values below this boundary are deemed "Non-
Aggressive" or "Safe," as shown in the decision function below:


=== PDF PAGE 49 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
41
This structured mathematical approach ensures that the detection system remains
objective, reproducible, and capable of handling the nuances of informal social media
discourse in real-time.
Algorithm Implementation
The implementation phase will involve translating the hybrid mathematical logic
into a fully functional system consisting of two components: a Python-based model
training and evaluation environment to be built in Jupyter Notebook, and a client-side
Chromium-based browser extension built in Vanilla JavaScript. This section describes
both components in detail so that another developer can reproduce the system.
Programming Language, Tools, and Libraries
The model training and evaluation will be conducted using Python inside a
Jupyter Notebook environment [16], [23]. The following libraries will be used, all of which
are open-source and do not rely on any third-party paid applications:

pandas — for loading and managing the dataset

scikit-learn — for splitting the dataset, computing performance metrics (precision,
recall, F1-score), and generating the confusion matrix

matplotlib and seaborn — for visualizing the confusion matrix and comparison bar
chart

json, math, re, collections — built-in Python libraries used for tokenization,
probability calculations, and data handling
The Chromium-based browser extension itself will be built using Vanilla
JavaScript with the Manifest V3 framework, which is the current standard for Chromium-
based browser extensions. No third-party machine learning platforms or external APIs
will be used. All detection logic runs entirely on the user's local device [13], [20].


=== PDF PAGE 50 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
42
Dataset Used for Training
The dataset used to train the Naive Bayes classifier consists of labeled text
samples sourced from public social media platforms and academic databases, with each
sample tagged as either aggressive (label = 1) or non-aggressive (label = 0) [8], [16].
The dataset will be loaded from a CSV file containing two columns — text and label as
shown in the following code from the Jupyter Notebook:
# CELL 2 — Load Dataset
DATA_PATH = os.path.join("data", "dataset.csv")
df = pd.read_csv(DATA_PATH)
df = df[["text", "label"]].dropna()
df["label"] = df["label"].astype(int)
print(f"Dataset loaded: {len(df)} total samples")
print(f"Aggressive
(1) : {(df['label']==1).sum()}")
print(f"Non-Aggressive (0) : {(df['label']==0).sum()}")
The dataset will then be split into a training set (80%) and a test set (20%) using scikit-
learn's train_test_split function, with stratification to ensure both classes will be evenly
represented in both sets [24]:
# CELL 3 — Train/Test Split (80/20)
train_df, test_df = train_test_split(
df, test_size=0.2, random_state=42, stratify=df["label"]
)
print(f"Training Set : {len(train_df)} samples (80%)")
print(f"Test Set
: {len(test_df)} samples (20%)")


=== PDF PAGE 51 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
43
Data Structures and Modules
The implementation follows a modular structure consisting of three components [15]:
Module 1 — Naive Bayes Classifier (Python/Jupyter Notebook)
The Naive Bayes classifier will be trained from scratch without using any pre-built
machine learning classifier, in compliance with the requirement that no third-party
applications be used. The training function will build a vocabulary from the training data,
count word occurrences per class, and compute log-prior and log-likelihood probabilities
using Laplace smoothing to handle unseen words [24], [25]:
# CELL 4 — Train Naive Bayes Model
def tokenize(text):
tokens = re.findall(r"[a-z]+", text.lower())
return [t for t in tokens if t not in STOP_WORDS and len(t) > 1]
def train_naive_bayes(texts, labels):
class_counts = defaultdict(int)
word_counts = {0: defaultdict(int), 1: defaultdict(int)}
vocab
= set()
for text, label in zip(texts, labels):
tokens = tokenize(text)
class_counts[label] += 1
for token in tokens:
word_counts[label][token] += 1
vocab.add(token)


=== PDF PAGE 52 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
44
total_docs = len(texts)
vocab_size = len(vocab)
log_prior = {str(c): math.log(class_counts[c]/total_docs) for c in (0,1)}
log_likelihood = {}
for c in (0, 1):
total_words = sum(word_counts[c].values()) + vocab_size
log_likelihood[str(c)] = {
word: math.log((word_counts[c].get(word,0)+1)/total_words)
for word in vocab
}
return {"log_prior": log_prior, "log_likelihood": log_likelihood,
"vocab_size": vocab_size}
model = train_naive_bayes(train_df["text"].tolist(), train_df["label"].tolist())
print(f"Naive Bayes trained! Vocabulary: {model['vocab_size']} words")
Module 2 — Prediction Functions and Hybrid Scoring
Three prediction functions will be defined: one for Naive Bayes only, one for VADER only,
and one for the hybrid model. The hybrid function will combine both scores using the
weighted formula.Rscore = (0.6 × Pnb) + (0.4 × Vcomp), with a classification threshold of
0.5 [8], [15]:
# CELL 5 — Define Prediction Functions
def predict_nb(text, threshold=0.5):
tokens = tokenize(text)
s0 = model["log_prior"]["0"]
s1 = model["log_prior"]["1"]
for t in tokens:


=== PDF PAGE 53 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
45
s0 += model["log_likelihood"]["0"].get(t, 0)
s1 += model["log_likelihood"]["1"].get(t, 0)
m = max(s0, s1)
e1 = math.exp(s1 - m)
e0 = math.exp(s0 - m)
prob = e1 / (e0 + e1)
return 1 if prob >= threshold else 0, prob
def predict_vader(text, threshold=0.5):
words = re.findall(r"[a-z]+", text.lower())
neg
= sum(1 for w in words if w in NEGATIVE_WORDS)
score = min(neg / max(len(words),1) * 3, 1.0)
return 1 if score >= threshold else 0, score
def predict_hybrid(text, threshold=0.5):
_, nb_prob
= predict_nb(text)
_, vader_prob = predict_vader(text)
hybrid = (0.6 * nb_prob) + (0.4 * vader_prob)
return 1 if hybrid >= threshold else 0, hybrid
Module 3 — Confusion Matrix and Performance Evaluation (Output)
The model's output will be evaluated using scikit-learn's precision, recall, and F1-score
functions, and visualized using a confusion matrix for each of the three models — Naive
Bayes only, VADER only, and Hybrid — to directly compare their performance [23]:
# CELL 11 — Confusion Matrices (Visual)
fig, axes = plt.subplots(1, 3, figsize=(16, 5))


=== PDF PAGE 54 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
46
models_data = [
("Naive Bayes Only", y_pred_nb),
("VADER Only",
y_pred_vader),
("Hybrid (NB+VADER)", y_pred_hybrid),
]
for ax, (name, y_pred) in zip(axes, models_data):
cm
= confusion_matrix(y_true, y_pred)
disp = ConfusionMatrixDisplay(cm,
display_labels=["Non-Aggressive","Aggressive"])
disp.plot(ax=ax, colorbar=False)
ax.set_title(name, fontsize=12, fontweight='bold')
plt.tight_layout()
plt.savefig("model/confusion_matrices.png", dpi=150, bbox_inches='tight')
plt.show()
The confusion matrix will show four values for each model: True Positives
(correctly flagged aggressive content), True Negatives (correctly identified safe content),
False Positives (safe content wrongly flagged), and False Negatives (aggressive content
that was missed). This visual output directly answers SOP 2 of the study by comparing
the precision, recall, and F1-score of the single-algorithm approaches against the hybrid
model [23].
Practical Challenges and Solutions
Three practical challenges will be encountered and resolved during implementation:
Challenge 1 — Building the classifier without third-party ML tools: Since
using third-party machine learning applications is not allowed, the Naive Bayes
classifier will need to be implemented from scratch using only Python's built-in


=== PDF PAGE 55 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
47
math and collections libraries. This will be solved by manually coding the
tokenization, vocabulary building, log-prior calculation, and Laplace smoothing
functions, producing a classifier fully owned and controlled by the researchers
[24], [25].
Challenge 2 — Memory management in the browser extension: Storing the
full trained vocabulary inside a browser extension risks consuming too much
memory. This will be solved by performing feature selection — keeping only the
most statistically significant tokens — which will reduce vocabulary size while
maintaining detection accuracy, keeping the extension's memory usage between
15MB and 30MB [23].
Challenge 3 — Handling dynamic content on social media pages: Many
platforms load new comments without refreshing the page, meaning a one-time
scan would miss new content. This will be solved by implementing the
MutationObserver API in the Chromium-based browser extension, which will
continuously monitor the DOM for newly loaded text and re-run the detection
pipeline automatically [20], [30].
Complexity Analysis
The development of the system will involve a complexity analysis considering the
time and space resources available for standard consumer-grade hardware. The time
complexity of analyzing a single comment is O(n), where n is the number of tokens in the
preprocessed text string. This is because the Naive Bayes probability summation and
VADER lexicon lookup are both single-pass operations. The algorithm will be designed
to complete comments in milliseconds by bypassing the nested loops and matrix
multiplications of deep learning models. In order to not compromise performance for long


=== PDF PAGE 56 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
48
comments, the authors will implement a boundary constraint and limit all comments to a
maximum of 128 tokens, thereby guaranteeing the total inference latency is well under
the 300ms threshold of human a perception for a good user experience.
The space complexity of the system is dominated by the size of the combined
vocabulary (V) and the sentiment lexicon (L), expressed as O(V+L). By performing
feature selection to retain only the most statistically significant tokens for the Naive
Bayes engine and utilizing a parsimonious lexicon for VADER, the researchers optimized
the model's memory footprint to reside comfortably within the browser's allocated RAM.
In practice, the extension consumes approximately 15MB to 30MB of memory during
active operation, which is negligible for modern systems equipped with at least 4GB of
RAM. This efficiency makes the system highly scalable; it can handle the rapid influx of
data from high-traffic social media threads without degrading the performance of other
open browser tabs or system processes, confirming the feasibility of the hybrid O(n)
model for real-time, on-device cyber-aggression mitigation.
System Development Methodology
This research utilizes the Scrum framework within the Agile methodology as the
primary approach for the development of the hybrid aggressive content detection system.
Scrum was more applicable than more traditional sequential methods such as Waterfall,
as the experimental features of this research will require iterative refinements, especially
for algorithm threshold tuning, DOM stability observation, and real-time mitigation
rendering, for which requirements and performance results cannot be fully determined
beforehand. Scrum allows the research team to complete and provide ‘shippable’ (i.e.,
usable) functionality for the system at the conclusion of each sprint, which permits
ongoing feedback, evaluation, and refinements throughout the system development life
cycle (SDLC).


=== PDF PAGE 57 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
49
The research team will be configured with members specifically assuming
assigned Scrum functions. One member will be assigned as the Product Owner,
responsible for carrying out system requirements definition, research task prioritization,
and confirming the proposed addition aligns with the objective of the study to mitigate
toxic triggers. Another member will be assigned the role of Scrum Master, responsible for
facilitating the planning of each sprint, progress monitoring, and ensuring the research
workflow is on track. All other team members will be assigned as part of the
Development team with individual responsibilities for the technical aspects of system
design and development of the Vanilla JavaScript engine, Manifest V3 integration, and
CSS mitigation UI. Documentation of the study is considered a shared task of all
members throughout the course of the study.
Figure 4. Scrum Methodology [34]
Phases
The development is organized into five sprints spanning approximately ten weeks as
follows:
Sprint 1 (Weeks 1–3): Dataset Construction and Preprocessing
The objective of the first sprint is to build a labeled dataset of aggressive and neutral text
samples that will be used to build the Naive Bayes model weights. The staff will conduct


=== PDF PAGE 58 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
50
effortful web comment data collection and categorization. The dataset will be a collection
of labeled data samples in English, ensuring class balance in the dataset to avoid
inducing bias on the dataset. The dataset will be structured in a local JSON-based hash
map format to achieve O(1) lookup time for the dataset during the implementation stage,
ensuring efficient dataset access during the model training stage.
Sprint 2 (Weeks 4–5): Algorithm Realization and Engine Integration
The second sprint is for the Hybrid Engine development. The researchers will code the
Naive Bayes and VADER logic in JavaScript as modules to be compliant with the
Manifest V3 policy. The engine will be built to perform several computations. The engine
will be designed to perform several computations at the same time. The objective is to
ensure that the 'Hybrid' component of the logic has both mathematical correctness and
computational efficiency.
Sprint 3 (Weeks 6–7): Web System Development (Extension Architecture)
In the third sprint, the target is to complete the development of the front-end interface
built on the Chromium-based browser extension framework. This includes creating the
DOM Scanner component using the MutationObserver API to manage control of the
inserted elements in the context of infinite scrolling. Unlike the other components, the
Mitigation UI is developed at this time. Using CSS Injection, the Mitigation UI can be
developed to control visual masks over the selected elements. This is the only sprint in
which the Scanner, Engine, and UI components will be developed and tested in a
complete integrated framework.


=== PDF PAGE 59 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
51
Figure 5. Use Case Diagram of the Proposed System
The use case diagram highlights real-time detection and mitigation for cyber-
aggression in the Chromium-based browser extension. It shows the extension's users'
interactions with the software to protect their online safety. The stick-figure user can
perform any of the following actions: Browse Content, Manage Settings, and Interact
With Content.
The browser extension actively monitors and analyzes the cyber-aggression of
content in real-time while the user is traversing the web in the "Browse Content" feature.
This is done by the automated detection and filtering of cyber-aggressive content [13],
[17].


=== PDF PAGE 60 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
52
The "Manage Settings" feature provides users the ability to personalize their
extension experience with custom filtering preferences of cyber-aggressive content by
whitelisting and blacklisting specific terms. The blocklist permits users to define terms
they consider to be aggressive so that they can be filtered, and the whitelist provides
users the ability to have terms that are considered aggressive by the extension to be left
unfiltered. This ability for users to make such adjustments is evidence of the UI/UX
design superiority of the extension [12], [16].
Within the "Interact With Content" feature, users can view filtered content and
have the ability to exercise the option of overriding the filter to show hidden text. This
feature [16] grants users the ability to access material that is considered harmful while
also restraining users from exercising the override option to control the content present.
The diagram shows functionalities using the <<include>> and <<extend>>
relationships.
For
example,
cyber-aggression
detection
includes
the
background
activities of text extraction and analysis, and revealing concealed content extends the
viewing of the masked content. This structured design shows the balance of system
automation and user control [20].
Overall, this diagram highlights how the Chromium-based browser extension
integrates real-time detection, automated filtering, and user customization features to
create a safer and more user-centered online browsing environment [17].


=== PDF PAGE 61 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
53
Figure 6. Activity Diagram of the Text Extraction Module
Figure 6 illustrates the sequential activities performed during real-time browsing.
The process begins by initializing the MutationObserver API to continuously monitor the
Document Object Model (DOM) for any newly inserted content on the webpage. Once a
DOM mutation is detected, the system evaluates whether the inserted node contains
user-generated text. If the node does not contain user-generated text, the system loops
back and continues monitoring. If user-generated text is identified, the module proceeds
to extract the raw text string from the DOM text nodes. The extracted text is then
truncated to a maximum of 128 tokens to enforce the system's performance boundary
and ensure inference latency remains within acceptable limits. Finally, the preprocessed
text is forwarded to the Classification Module via the Hybrid Engine for further analysis.


=== PDF PAGE 62 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
54
Figure 7. Activity Diagram of the Classification Module
Figure 7 presents the parallel processing activities that serve as the core
detection engine of the proposed system. Upon receiving the extracted text, the system
performs text preprocessing, which involves tokenization, removal of stop-words, and
normalization of the input. Following preprocessing, the system simultaneously executes
two parallel analytical processes. In the first path, the Naive Bayes classifier looks up
word probabilities from the local JSON hash map and computes the posterior probability
of aggression score, referred to as Pnb. In the second parallel path, the VADER
sentiment analysis
tool evaluates the
emotional
tone of the
text by analyzing
capitalization, punctuation, and slang, producing a compound sentiment score, referred
to as Vcomp, normalized between -1.0 and +1.0. Once both scores are obtained, the


=== PDF PAGE 63 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
55
system merges the two results and computes the hybrid risk score using the weighted
formula Rscore = w1·Pnb + w2·|Vcomp|, where w1 and w2 sum to 1. The computed
Rscore is then evaluated against a threshold of 0.5. If the score meets or exceeds the
threshold, the content is classified as aggressive and the result is sent to the Mitigation
Module. If the score falls below the threshold, the content is classified as safe and no
further action is taken.
Figure 8. Activity Diagram of the Mitigation Module
Figure 8 depicts the activities carried out upon receiving the classification result
from the Classification Module. The process begins when the module receives an
aggressive or non-aggressive label for the evaluated content. If the content is
determined to be non-aggressive, the system bypasses the mitigation steps and


=== PDF PAGE 64 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
56
proceeds directly to display the content normally to the user. If the content is classified
as aggressive, the system applies a CSS blur or mask to the corresponding DOM
element, effectively hiding the harmful text from the user's view without requiring a page
reload. Following the application of the blur, the system presents a "Reveal" button,
providing the user with an optional override to view the hidden content. If the user
chooses to reveal the content, the blur is removed and the system proceeds to continue
the DOM monitoring loop. If the user does not interact with the reveal button, the content
remains hidden and the system likewise continues the DOM monitoring loop. This
cyclical process ensures that the user is continuously protected from cyber-aggressive
content throughout their browsing session
Sprint 4 (Week 8): Technical Optimization and Performance
Profiling
The fourth sprint is the most significant phase of the optimization cycle. The system is
analyzed to determine its inference latency and memory footprint. To tackle issues
related to RAM consumption on client-level systems, the team will engage in Vocabulary
Pruning, meaning the JSON hash map will be trimmed of minimal tokens. This should
ensure that the extension is able to remain low in overhead while in the process of
scanning active web pages.
Sprint 5 (Weeks 9–10): User Evaluation and Final Refinement
The fifth and last sprint is the assessment of end-users of the deployed system. Users of
the system will evaluate the system's Functional Suitability and Usability according to the
ISO 25010 standard via a structured four-point Likert scale questionnaire. Feedback
gathered during this sprint informs the final refinements to the blur intensity and detection
sensitivity, contributing to the conclusions and recommendations section of the research
manuscript.


=== PDF PAGE 65 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
57
Statistical Treatment of Data
The data gathered from internal algorithmic testing and external evaluative
validation will be analyzed with descriptive statistics to guarantee that the results are
valid and correct. The statistical treatment is divided into two main components: (1)
evaluating the hybrid machine learning model using objective performance metrics, and
(2) assessing software quality based on user and expert input.
To measure the Chromium-based browser extension's performance in detecting
cyber-aggression, standard evaluation metrics will be utilized. These measurements
provide a mathematical basis for comparing the hybrid Naive Bayes and VADER
approach to single-algorithm solutions. The following statistical equations will be used:
Where:
TP (True Positive): Correctly identified aggressive content.
TN (True Negative): Correctly identified neutral content.
FP (False Positive): Neutral content incorrectly flagged as aggressive.
FN (False Negative): Aggressive content that bypassed the detection system.
Precision: The proportion of content flagged as aggressive that was verified to
be genuinely cyber-aggressive.
Recall: The proportion of actual aggressive content correctly identified and
mitigated by the system.


=== PDF PAGE 66 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
58
F1-Score: The harmonic mean of Precision and Recall, used as the primary
performance metric to ensure a balanced measurement of system accuracy.
For the evaluative validation involving end-users and IT experts, responses
gathered through the four-point Likert scale will be analyzed using measures of central
tendency to assess the system based on ISO 25010 software quality characteristics.
Weighted Mean: This will be used to determine the general "verdict" or average rating
for the extension's functional suitability, interaction capability, performance efficiency,
and reliability.
Where:
WM: Weighted Mean
f: Frequency of each response
x: The numerical weight (Likert scale value)
N: Total number of respondents
Percentage Distribution: This method will be used to show the proportion of
respondents who fall into various evaluation categories, resulting in a clear visual of
group consensus on the tool's simplicity of use and practical deployment.
Population and Sampling
Participants in this study are divided into two groups to ensure that the cyber-
aggression detection system is evaluated from both a technical and practical perspective.
The first group consists of End Users, comprising thirty (30) individuals from the
local community in Laguna, Philippines, who are 18 years of age or older and are


=== PDF PAGE 67 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
59
frequent users of Chromium-based browsers and online platforms that display publicly
accessible user-generated text, including social media platforms such as Facebook, X
(formerly Twitter), YouTube, and Reddit, as well as blogs, news sites, and other web-
based platforms where user-generated commentary is prevalent. A sample of thirty (30)
end users was deemed appropriate as it satisfies the statistical baseline required to
achieve a normal distribution for quantitative Likert-scale analysis, while remaining small
enough to allow the researchers to conduct highly controlled, closely observed usability
testing sessions. The second group consists of IT Experts, comprising ten (10)
individuals who specialize in Software Engineering, Systems Analysis, and Quality
Assurance. This group size is intentional, as expert-based technical evaluations in small-
scale system studies generally require fewer participants given the depth, precision, and
professional relevance of each respondent's assessment. Together, these two groups
form a total sample size of forty (40) participants, a size that balances the breadth of
practical user feedback with the depth of specialized technical evaluation.
Both groups were selected using Purposive Sampling, a non-probability
sampling method in which participants are deliberately chosen based on specific criteria
relevant to the study's objectives. This approach is appropriate for both groups because
the research requires respondents with clearly defined qualifications rather than a
random representation of the general population. For the End Users, selection was
based
on
their
regular
use
of
Chromium-based
desktop
browsers
and
active
engagement with online platforms that display publicly accessible user-generated text,
ensuring that feedback on Functional Suitability and Ease of Use reflects realistic
browsing experiences across a variety of text-heavy environments. For the IT Experts,
selection was based on their professional background in systems analysis, software
architecture,
and
quality
assurance,
ensuring
that
evaluations
of
the
system's
Maintainability and Reliability are grounded in genuine technical expertise capable of
assessing the code quality and logic of the Naive Bayes and VADER algorithms. This
targeted selection strategy ensures that all collected feedback is directly relevant to the
study's technical and practical objectives.


=== PDF PAGE 68 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
60
Table 2. Distribution of Respondents and Sampling Method
Classification
Sampling Method
Number of Respondents
End Users
Purposive Sampling
30
IT Experts
Purposive Sampling
10
Total
40
Evaluation and Scoring
The performance of the proposed Chromium-based browser extension will be
evaluated through a dual-track methodology to ensure both technical precision and
practical software quality. This approach allows the researchers to measure the
effectiveness of the Naive Bayes and VADER hybrid model from two complementary
perspectives: the objective performance of the algorithm and the subjective experience
of the end-users.
The first track focuses on Technical Classification Performance, which assesses
the system’s mathematical accuracy. The researchers will evaluate the hybrid model
against a controlled, pre-labeled dataset containing both aggressive and non-aggressive
text. The system’s performance will be quantified using standard machine learning
metrics: Precision, which monitors the system's ability to avoid false positives and Recall,
which ensures that harmful content is successfully detected. The F1-Score will serve as
the primary indicator of effectiveness, as it provides a balanced measure that accounts
for both detection errors and missed aggression.
The second track evaluates Software Quality based on the ISO 25010 standard,
focusing on Functional Suitability and Usability. This evaluation is conducted by the
respondents using a structured survey. Functional Suitability measures how effectively
the extension identifies and masks cyber-aggressive content in real-time browsing
environments. Usability assesses the extension's "lightweight" nature, including the ease


=== PDF PAGE 69 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
61
of user interaction and the tool’s impact on browser performance. Each criterion is
scored using a four-point Likert scale, which eliminates neutral responses and requires
evaluators to provide a definitive judgment on the system’s performance.
To ensure a comprehensive analysis, the system will also be monitored for
Technical Efficiency. This includes measuring the processing latency—the time it takes
for the extension to scan and mask a user-generated text sample—and its memory
footprint. By documenting these technical logs alongside user feedback, the researchers
can determine if the system maintains the 300ms response threshold required for a
seamless browsing experience. The final score for each category will be derived from the
weighted mean of all responses, providing a standardized basis for the study's
conclusions.
Table 3. Four-Point Likert Scale Interpretation for User and Expert Feedback
Weighted
Mean Range
Points
Verbal
Interpretation
Qualitative Description
3.51 – 4.00
4
Strongly Agree
Highly Effective: The system works
perfectly with no issues
2.51 – 3.50
3
Agree
Effective: The system works well with
minor suggestions.
1.51 – 2.50
2
Disagree
Ineffective: The system has noticeable
problems or errors.
1.00 – 1.50
1
Strongly Disagree
Highly Ineffective: The system does not
work as intended.


=== PDF PAGE 70 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
62
Ethical Considerations
The researchers are committed to conducting this study with the utmost honesty,
ensuring that the rights and safety of all participants are prioritized throughout the
research process. This study strictly adheres to the Data Privacy Act of 2012 (RA 10173),
ensuring
that
any
data
processed—specifically
user-generated
text
containing
aggressive or harsh language—is never utilized to profile individuals or track personal
identities. In accordance with the Pamantasan ng Cabuyao (PNC) guidelines, the study
upholds the university’s mandate on ethical research conduct. This commitment is
formalized through the use of the official Informed Consent Form (PNC:PRE-FO-50)
prior to any data gathering, ensuring participants are aware of their right to withdraw at
any time without prejudice.
The study will be submitted to the Research Ethics Review Committee (RERC)
for ethics review and clearance (PNC:PRE-FO-49) to ensure adherence to principles
governing the protection of human subjects and confidentiality. To protect the digital
dignity of the respondents, all survey data and system logs are treated as strictly
confidential and stored in encrypted, password-protected files to prevent unauthorized
access.
In addition, the researchers will ensure that this work is original and complies with
university policies against plagiarism and contract research, which ensures the project's
intellectual integrity. Once the final defense is concluded and the research objectives are
met, all data with participant identifiers, including records of harsh interactions and
participant feedback, will be immediately deleted after anonymization for human
participant data, and retained for one year for internet-sourced data. Anonymized data
will be retained for five years after the publication or defense of the study, after which it
will be securely and permanently deleted to fulfill legal requirements for secure data
disposal. The researchers also transparently declare the use of Artificial Intelligence
tools in the preparation of this manuscript. Claude was utilized for coding guidance and


=== PDF PAGE 71 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
63
technical implementation support, Gemini was used for writing and refining the
documentation, Grammarly was used for grammar and language correction, and Turnitin
was used as a plagiarism checker to ensure the originality of the manuscript. Consistent
with the university’s focus on ethical research, the researchers acknowledge that while
AI helped refine the presentation, the conceptual framework, algorithm implementation,
and data analysis are the original intellectual output of the authors. All sources used in
the development of the system and the manuscript have been properly cited to avoid
academic dishonesty and maintain the credibility of the research.


=== PDF PAGE 72 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
64
Literature Cited
[1] J. F. Naga and R. Q. Lavilles, "Deciphering Digital Discourse: Detecting Cyberbullying
Patterns in Filipino Tweets Using Machine Learning," CommIT Journal, vol. 18, no. 2,
pp.
167–181,
2024.
[Online].
Available:
https://journal.binus.ac.id/index.php/commit/article/view/11094
[2] L. J. Labrague, "Facebook Use and Adolescents' Emotional States of Depression,
Anxiety, and Stress," Health Science Journal, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 80–89, 2014.
[3] I. F. Ashari, "Analysis Sentiments in Facebook Down Case Using VADER and Naive
Bayes Classification Method," Jurnal Ilmiah Multitek Indonesia, vol. 16, no. 2, pp.
75–89,
Dec.
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://journal.umpo.ac.id/index.php/multitek/article/view/5601
[4] J. Antisdel, W. R. Miller, and D. Groves, "Data Mining Trauma: AI-Assisted Qualitative
Study of Cyber Victimization on Reddit," JMIR Infodemiology, vol. 5, p. e75493, 2025.
[Online]. Available: https://infodemiology.jmir.org/2025/1/e75493
[5] S. Shajahan, N. Jagadish, T. George, J. P. V., S. K. M., and S. Krishna, "Browser
Extension
for
Phishing
Website
Detection
Using
Machine
Learning,"
AIJR
Proceedings,
vol.
7,
no.
5,
pp.
30–37,
Sep.
2025.
[Online].
Available:
https://proceedings.aijr.org/index.php/ap/article/view/13
[6] V. Nahar, S. Al-Maskari, X. Li, and C. Pang, "Semi-Supervised Learning for
Cyberbullying Detection in Social Networks," in Proc. Australasian Database Conf.,
Springer, Cham, 2014, pp. 160–171.
[7] L. M. Gandy, L. V. Ivanitskaya, and L. L. Bacon, "Public Health Discussions on Social
Media: Evaluating Automated Sentiment Analysis Methods," JMIR Formative
Research,
vol.
9,
p.
e57395,
Jan.
2025.
[Online].
Available:
https://formative.jmir.org/2025/1/e57395
[8] C. J. Hutto and E. Gilbert, “VADER: A parsimonious rule-based model for sentiment
analysis of social media text,” in Proceedings of the 8th International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM), vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 216–225, 2
014. [Online]. Available: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ICWSM/article/view/14550
[9] S. Lidder, “Comparison of Naïve Bayes classifier and K-nearest neighbor algorithms
in sentiment analysis on social media X with VADER lexicon,” J. Inform. Komput.
(JIKO),
2025.
[Online].
Available: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/394817086


=== PDF PAGE 73 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
65
[10] P. Kumari, S. Yadav, and S. Kargutkar, “Cyber bullying detection on social media
using machine learning,” ITM Web of Conferences, vol. 40, p. 03038, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1051/itmconf/20214003038
[11] S. Purkayastha et al., “Advancing cyberbullying detection: A hybrid machine learning
and deep learning framework for social media analysis,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Pattern Recognition Applications and Methods
(ICPRAM),
2025.
[Online].https://www.scitepress.org/Papers/2025/134362/134362.pdf
[12] E. A. Vogels, “The State of Online Harassment,” Pew Research Center, Jan. 13,
2021. https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2021/01/13/the-state-of-online-harassment/
[13] A. Alharbi, M. Aljuaid, and N. Alotaibi, “Machine Learning Approaches for Hate
Speech Detection in Social Media,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 153114–153125,
2021.
[14] F. Khan, S. Qamar, and M. Usman, “Sentiment Analysis of Social Media Text Using
VADER and Machine Learning Techniques,” International Journal of Advanced
Computer Science and Applications, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 412–418, 2022.
[15] R. Sharma and A. Singh, “Hybrid Cyberbullying Detection Framework Using
Sentiment Analysis and Naive Bayes Classifier,” Procedia Computer Science, vol.
198, pp. 349–356, 2022.
[16] J. Lee, H. Park, and K. Kim, “Real-Time Toxic Comment Detection Using Browser-
Based NLP Extension,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 69, no.
2, pp. 234–242, 2023.
[17] D. Patel and R. Mehta, “Real-Time Online Toxicity Filtering Using Machine Learning
and Sentiment Analysis,” Journal of Information Security and Applications, vol. 79,
pp. 103652, 2024.
[18] “Application Programming Interface (API),” Mozilla Developer Network (MDN),
accessed Feb. 2026.
[19] D. Thomas, "Introduction to Client-Side and Server-Side Processing," DTS Tech Fit
Edu, Jan. 29, 2025.
[20] “Document Object Model (DOM),” Mozilla Developer Network (MDN), accessed Feb.
2026. [Online]. Available:
https://developer.mozilla.org/enUS/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model
[21] “Naive Bayes classifier,” Wikipedia, accessed Feb. 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Naive_Bayes_classifier
[22] Natural Language Processing, Cambridge University Press. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/natural-language-processing.


=== PDF PAGE 74 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
66
[23]
F-score,
Encyclopedia
Britannica,
accessed
Feb.
2026.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.britannica.com/science/F-score
[24] Z. Zhang, "Naïve Bayes classification in R," Annals of Translational Medicine, vol. 4,
no. 12, p. 241, Jun. 2016.
[25] S. Raschka, "Naive Bayes and Text Classification I - Introduction and Theory," arXiv
preprint arXiv:1410.5329, 2014.
[26] V. A. Narayanan, I. Arora, and A. Bhatia, "Fast and Accurate Sentiment
Classification Using an Enhanced Naive Bayes Model," International Journal of
Intelligent Systems and Applications, vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 60-71, 2013.
[27] R. W. Picard, Affective Computing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.
[28] S. Salawu, Y. He, and J. Lumsden, "Approaches to Automated Detection of
Cyberbullying: A Survey," IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 11, no.
1, pp. 3-24, Jan.-Mar. 2020.
[29] P. Nandwani and R. Verma, "A review on sentiment analysis and emotion detection
from text," Social Network Analysis and Mining, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 81, Dec. 2021.
[30] M. A. Akhter and Z. Ahmed, "Real-time content filtering and DOM manipulation for
safer web browsing," International Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 175, no.
15, pp. 12-18, 2020.
[31] J. W. Patchin and S. Hinduja, "Cyberbullying: An Update and Synthesis of the
Research," in Cyberbullying Prevention and Response: Expert Perspectives, New
York, NY: Routledge, 2012, pp. 13-35.
[32]
"Precision,"
Oxford
Learner's
Dictionaries,
2026.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/definition/english/precision
[33]
"Recall
(Information
Retrieval),"
Wikipedia,
2026.
[Online].
Available:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_recall
[34]
Scrum.org.
(2020).
The
Scrum
Framework
Poster.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.scrum.org/resources/scrum-framework-poster
[35]
Philippine Statistics Authority, Information and Communications Technology (ICT)
Access and Usage of Households and Individuals in the Philippines, 2023.
[36]
Department
of
Information
and
Communications
Technology,
National
ICT
Household Survey, 2022.


=== PDF PAGE 75 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
67
Appendices
A. Copy of Confidentiality and Non-Disclosure Agreement (if PNC is a research
site-PNC PRE-FO-68 Confidentiality and Non-disclosure Agreement (NDA) on
Student Research)
B. Validated Research Instrument/s
C. Informed Consent Form (PNC PRE-FO-50 Informed Consent Form)


=== PDF PAGE 76 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
68


=== PDF PAGE 77 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
69


=== PDF PAGE 78 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
70
D. Research Ethics Review Committee Evaluation (PNC PRE-FO-49 Research
Ethics Application Form)


=== PDF PAGE 79 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
71
E. Short report of Plagiarism Software


=== PDF PAGE 80 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
72


=== PDF PAGE 81 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
73
F. Report of Language Software


=== PDF PAGE 82 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
74


=== PDF PAGE 83 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
75


=== PDF PAGE 84 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
76


=== PDF PAGE 85 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
77
G. Bio-Note of Student Researchers
Ryzza Miel E. Damian is an undergraduate student currently pursuing a degree in
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science at the University of Cabuyao (PnC). She has
developed
foundational
knowledge
in
programming,
machine
learning,
and
web
development, with academic interests focused on cybersecurity and intelligent systems
for online safety.
She
has
participated
in
academic
projects
and
coursework
involving
system
development, data analysis, and research-based applications, which contributed to the
development
of
her
skills
in
software
design,
problem-solving,
and
technical
documentation.
For the current study, she serves as the research leader, responsible for project
coordination,
system
development
oversight,
data
analysis,
and
documentation
management. She has undergone basic orientation or training in research ethics and
data privacy, ensuring compliance with institutional and regulatory standards.
Ryzza Miel E. Damian affirms that the information provided herein is accurate and limited
to what is necessary for research evaluation purposes, in compliance with the Data
Privacy Act of 2012.


=== PDF PAGE 86 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
78
Angel Mae P. Garcia is an undergraduate student currently pursuing a degree in
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science at the University of Cabuyao (PnC). She has
developed foundational knowledge in software development, data management, and
natural language processing, with academic interests focused on cybersecurity and
intelligent systems for online safety.
She
has
participated
in
academic
projects
and
coursework
involving
system
development, data analysis, and research-based applications, which contributed to the
development
of
her
skills
in
technical
documentation,
data
organization,
and
collaborative problem-solving.
For the current study, she serves as a researcher, responsible for data gathering,
comprehensive documentation, and performance metrics evaluation. She has undergone
basic orientation or training in research ethics and data privacy, ensuring compliance
with institutional and regulatory standards.
Angel Mae P. Garcia affirms that the information provided herein is accurate and limited
to what is necessary for research evaluation purposes, in compliance with the Data
Privacy Act of 2012.


=== PDF PAGE 87 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
79
Cyryl P. Palisoc is an undergraduate student currently pursuing a degree in Bachelor of
Science in Computer Science at the University of Cabuyao (PnC). He has developed
foundational knowledge in software engineering, database systems, and algorithm
design, with academic interests focused on cybersecurity and intelligent systems for
online safety.
He has participated in academic projects and coursework involving system development,
data analysis, and research-based applications, which contributed to the development of
his skills in software architecture, problem-solving, and technical implementation.
For the current study, he serves as the lead programmer, responsible for the design,
development, and implementation of the Chromium-based browser extension, including
the integration of the Naive Bayes classification and VADER sentiment analysis
algorithms. He has undergone basic orientation or training in research ethics and data
privacy, ensuring compliance with institutional and regulatory standards.
Cyryl P. Palisoc affirms that the information provided herein is accurate and limited to
what is necessary for research evaluation purposes, in compliance with the Data Privacy
Act of 2012.


=== PDF PAGE 88 ===
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING STUDIES
80
Yasmien Aira V. Regidor is an undergraduate student currently pursuing a degree in
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science at the University of Cabuyao (PnC). She has
developed
foundational
knowledge
in
programming,
database
management,
and
software engineering, with academic interests focused on cybersecurity and intelligent
systems for online safety.
She
has
participated
in
academic
projects
and
coursework
involving
a
library
management system, a student record database, and a usability study for a mobile
application, which contributed to the development of problem-solving, systematic
documentation, and basic scripting for data processing.
For the current study, she serves as a junior programmer and researcher, responsible for
assisting in the development of data collection tools, performing basic data cleaning and
analysis, documenting research procedures, and supporting the integration of technical
outputs into the research framework. She has undergone basic orientation or training in
research ethics and data privacy, ensuring compliance with institutional and regulatory
standards.
Yasmien Aira V. Regidor affirms that the information provided herein is accurate and
limited to what is necessary for research evaluation purposes, in compliance with the
Data Privacy Act of 2012.
